=head1 Input Files

The programs in this package use several types of input file, all of
which are collected here.  The type of a file is specified by its
suffix:

  Suffix           File Type
  ------           ---------
   .bdf            Bone definition file
   .cfg            Agent configuration file
   .mau            Minimum Animal Units file
   .cnt            Skeletal part counts
   .wgt            Skeletal part weights

All of these formats are plain ascii.  Comments may be included in any
input file.  A comment begins with the character # and ends at the end
of the line.  Comments are ignored by the input routines.  None of the
programs in the package use all of these types of input file, but
several of them use more than one.

=head2 Bone Definition File (.bdf)

The bone definition file is used to describe the characteristics of
skeletal parts.  Example:

    #File toy.bdf
    2   #number of parts
    #label      live    density
    Skull       1       0.49
    Femur       2       0.37

The file toy.bdf defines the skeletal parts of a toy model in which
there are only two elements: skull and femur.  The first line of input
says that there are 2 parts.  The next line is a comment that is
ignored by the input routine.  After that, each line has three fields,
which are separated by white space (blanks and/or tabs):

=over 8

=item Field 1

the label of the skeletal part

=item Field 2

the number of this part in a complete skeleton

=item Field 3

the density of this part.  The program assumes that bones survive
attrition with a probability equal to exp(-beta*I<A>/density), where
I<A> is a scaling constant determined by the program and beta measures
the intensity of attrition.  I<A> is determined by the program so that
when beta=1, half the bones in an entire skeleton would survive
attrition.  Because of this rescaling, it doesn't matter what units
density is measured in.

=back

=head2 Agent Configuration File (.cfg)

The agent configuration file describes the characteristics of agents
of deposition.  Example:

    # file:  home.cfg
    2  #number of parts
    5  #number of configurations

    #probabilities of configurations:
             0.5   0.2   0.15    0.1    0.05

    #Configurations:
    #label              
    Skull    0     0     1       1      1
    Femur    1     2     2       1      0

An animal need not be deposited in the assemblage as an entire
skeleton.  It may be deposited as a skull only, as a skull and 1
femur, as 2 femurs and no skull, and so on.  Each of these
possibilities is called a "configuration".  To describe an agent of
deposition, the current input routine requires that one specify the
configurations that are possible along with their probabilities.

(If the number of configurations is large, this could be unwieldy.  If
there is any demand, I will revise the input routines to allow a
shorter form of input.  The shorter form would require the user to
specify the mean number of each skeletal part, the mean square of each
part, and the mean product of each pair of parts.  To calculate these
numbers, one would ordinarily need to start with a list of
configurations together with their probabilities.  Thus, I see no
clear advantage to the shorter input format.  If anyone does need it,
let me know and I will revise the code.)

In the .cfg file, the lines are interpreted as follows:

=over 7

=item Line 1

the number of skeletal parts

=item Line 2

the number of configurations

=item Line 3

numbers, separated by white space, giving the probabilities of the
configurations.  Although I refer to these as probabilities, they need
not sum to 1, for they are renormalized by the input routine.  For
example, the probabilities line for a data set with 5 configurations
might look like 

    1 1 2 1 1

which would imply that the probability of configuration 3 is twice as
large as those of configurations 1, 2, 4, and 5.

=item Each succeeding line 

has several fields, separated by whitespace.  The first field is the
label for a particular skeletal part.  The remaining fields give the
number of that part in configuration 1, configuration 2, and so on.

=back

For example, home.cfg tells us that there are 2 parts and 5
configurations.  The 1st configuration occurs with probability 0.5 and
consists of 0 skulls and 1 femur.

=head2 Minimum Animal Units File (.mau)

In published literature, one often finds skeletal part counts
expressed as Minimum Animal Units (MAUs).  These are equal to the
number of distinct copies of each part divided by the number of copies
of that part in a living animal.  The .mau file format provides the
same information as the .cfg file format except that skeletal parts
are expressed as MAUs rather than as raw counts.  The format is
identical to the .cfg format except that configurations are columns of
floating-point numbers rather than columns of integers.  Use the
program mau2cfg to convert from .mau format to .cfg format.

=head2 Skeletal Part Count File (.cnt)

The skeletal part count file is read by several of the programs in the
package.  In addition, abcsim produces output is in the form of a .cnt
file so that it can be used as input to abcml.  This file provides the
counts of skeletal parts from one or more assemblages.  Here is an
example:

    # file: toy.cnt
      2 #number of parts
      2 #number of data sets
    #label              DS0  DS1
    Skull               537  549
    Femur               942  983

The first two lines give the number of skeletal parts and the number
of data sets.  Each succeeding line has several fields separated by
whitespace, which are interpreted as follows:

=over 8

=item Field 1

skeletal part label

=item Field 2

count of this part in the 1st data set

=item Field n

count of this part in the (n-1)th data set

=back

=head2 Weight File (.wgt)

The weight file format is read only by wgtcfg.  It allows wgtcfg to
generate a .cfg file that is consistent with the assumption that
configurations that are high in energetic value but easy to carry are
most likely to be transported.  Its format looks like this:

  24 # number of parts
  #part               MUI    GrossWgt
  half-mandible       295.00   889.00 # without tongue; divisor=2
  atlas/axis          262.00   315.00 # divisor = 2
  cervical_vert       272.14   301.71 # divisor = 7
  thoracic_vert       187.15   214.62 # divisor = 13
  lumbar_vert         284.33   323.33 # divisor = 6
  innominate          843.67  1058.88 # = pelvis/3
  sacrum              843.67  1058.88 # = pelvis/3
  rib                 101.92   141.81 # divisor = 26
  scapula            2295.00  2398.00 # divisor = 1
  P_humerus           743.00   830.50 # divisor = 2
  D_humerus           743.00   830.50 # divisor = 2
  P_radius            377.50   459.50 # divisor = 2
  D_radius            377.50   459.50 # divisor = 2
  carpal               33.50    46.75 # divisor = 8
  P_metacarpal         33.50    46.75 # divisor = 8
  D_metacarpal         33.50    46.75 # divisor = 8
  phalange             15.67    24.67 # divisor = 6
  P_femur            2569.50  2671.00 # divisor = 2
  D_femur            2569.50  2671.00 # divisor = 2
  P_tibia             218.33   255.33 # divisor = 6
  D_tibia             218.33   255.33 # divisor = 6
  tarsal              218.33   255.33 # divisor = 6
  P_metatarsal        290.50   377.00 # divisor = 2
  D_metatarsal        290.50   377.00 # divisor = 2

As usual, the first column gives the labels of the skeletal parts.
The second column gives some measure of the utility of the part.  In
this example I have used the "meat utility index" (MUI) of Metcalfe
and Jones (1988, p 489).  It is simply the weight (in grams, as I
recall) of the meat attached to the bone.  The third column gives the
gross weight (again, I think, in grams) of the skeletal part.

There is one minor complication.  Published data provide weights not
for individual skeletal parts but for various packages that are
thought to be transported together (Metcalfe and Jones 1988, p 489;
Binford 1978, pp 16-17).  For example, the values published for "ribs"
refer to the entire rib cage, but those for "femur" refer to a single
femur (not the two femurs together).  Both the MUI and the GrossWgt
values must be divided into components that reflect the skeletal parts
used in the analysis.  If the ribs always travel together, then it
doesn't matter whether we assign the entire weight to a single rib and
assign zero weight to the other ribs, or whether we assign equal
weight to each rib.  The latter choice is simpler, however, so that is
what I have done here.  Since there are 26 ribs, I divided the
published "rib" values by 26.  Since the distal and proximal ends of
the femur are tabulated separately, I divided the published "femur"
values by 2.  These divisors are given in comments at the end of each
input line to help me remember what I did.
  
=cut




