=head1 WGTCFG Documentation File

  usage: wgtcfg xxx.wgt xxx.cfg [options]
  where:
        .wgt file defines weights of skeletal parts
        .cfg file configures agent
   options may include:
   -c x Mean number of extra carriers. Def: 0.25
   -i x Inflate size by factor x. Def: 1
   -l x Maximum load per carrier. Def: 20 kg
   -m   Multiply weights by existing pr values?  Def: No

Wgtcfg an agent configuration (.cfg) file, which provides a list of
configurations (the term "configuration" is defined in F<abcml>).

The program reads a .wgt file and a .cfg file (see F<files>).  The
first of these provides the weight in grams of the meat attached to
each skeletal part and the gross weight (i.e. the weight in grams of
the meat and bone together).  The .cfg file provides a list of
configurations of skeletal parts.

The program then uses a built-in model to calculate the probability
that each skeletal part will be transported.  This defines a new .cfg
file, which is written as output in standard .cfg format.

The model used to assign transport probabilities embodies the
assumptions that foragers value meat more than bone and that their
capacity for carrying a load is limited.  Thus, they prefer
configurations that are light but rich in meat.  More specifically,
the value of a configuration is taken to equal the energetic content
of the meat attached minus the energetic cost of carrying it home.
The probability that a configuration will be transported is taken to
be proportional to its net energetic value.

The the energetic cost of carrying a load is calculated using the
formula of Pandolf, Givoni and Goldman (1977).  This calculation makes
the following assumptions:

=over 4

=item *

A forager weighs 55 kg.

=item *

While carrying a load, the foragers travels at 1 m per second (2.16
miles per hour) along a flat dirt trail.  The dirt trail assumption
implies that the "eta" parameter is equal to 1.1.

=item *

The load is carried for 2 hours.

=item *

A forager can carry at most 20 kg.

=item *

There is always at least 1 forager available to carry loads.  The
number of additional foragers is a Poisson-distributed random variable
with mean 0.25.

=back

The energetic value of a configuration was calculated by summing the
weight of meat attached to each part to obtain the total meat weight
of a configuration.  This weight is then converted from grams into
kilojoules (of energy) by multiplying by 6600, a value that Anderson
(1989) obtained for white-tailed deer.

This program was used in the calculations described by Rogers
(1999 unpublished). 

=head2 References

=over 4

=item S<Anderson, B. A. 1989>

I<Composition of Foods: Lamb, Veal, and Game Products>,
US Department of Agriculture Agricultural Handbook Number 8-17.

=item S<Binford, Lewis R. 1978>

I<Nunamiut Ethnoarchaeology>. Academic Press, New York.

=item S<Pandolf KB, Givoni B, Goldman RF. 1977.>

Predicting energy expenditure with loads while standing or walking
very slowly. I<Journal of Applied Physiology> 43(4):577-581.

=item S<Rogers, Alan. 1999 unpublished>

On the problem of equifinality in faunal analysis.  Submitted for publication.

=back
